प्रद्युम्नो रौक्मिणेय: स खलु तव कला शम्बरेणाहृतस्तं
हत्वा रत्या सहाप्तो निजपुरमहरद्रुक्मिकन्यां च धन्याम् ।
तत्पुत्रोऽथानिरुद्धो गुणनिधिरवहद्रोचनां रुक्मिपौत्रीं
तत्रोद्वाहे गतस्त्वं न्यवधि मुसलिना रुक्म्यपि द्यूतवैरात् ॥१॥
प्रद्युम्न: रौक्मिणेय:	Pradyumna, Rukmini's son
स खलु तव कला	he indeed Thy part incarnation
शम्बरेण-आहृत:-	by Shambara was kidnapped
तं हत्वा	him killing
रत्या सह-आप्त:	with Rati returned
निजपुरम्-	to his own city
अहरत्-रुक्मि-कन्यां	took away Rukmi's daughter
च धन्यां	and she the fortunate one
तत्-पुत्र:-अथ-	his son then
अनिरुद्ध: गुणनिधि:-	Aniruddha, very virtuous
अवहत्-रोचनाम्	married Rochanaa
रुक्मि पौत्रीम्	Rukmi's grand daughter
तत्र-उद्वाहे गत:-त्वं	there, in that wedding Thou went
न्यवधि मुसलिना	was killed by Balaraam
रुक्मि-अपि	Rukmi also
द्यूत-वैरात्	in the game of dice animosity
Pradyumna, Rukmini's son was an aspect of Thy essence and was kidnapped by Shambara at birth. Later Pradyumna killed Shambara and returned to his city of Dwaarikaa with his wife Rati. He also carried away the fortunate daughter of Rukmi and married her. His virtuous son Aniruddha married Rochanaa, the grand daughter of Rukmi. Thou had gone to that wedding. During a game of dice, when a quarrel arose, Rukmi was killed by Balaraam.
बाणस्य सा बलिसुतस्य सहस्रबाहो-
र्माहेश्वरस्य महिता दुहिता किलोषा ।
त्वत्पौत्रमेनमनिरुद्धमदृष्टपूर्वं
स्वप्नेऽनुभूय भगवन् विरहातुराऽभूत् ॥२॥
बाणस्य सा	of Baana, she
बलि-सुतस्य	of Bali's son (Baan)
सहस्र-बाहो:-	of a thousand arms
माहेश्वरस्य	devotee of Shiva
महिता दुहिता	the esteemed daughter
किल-उषा	indeed Ushaa
त्वत्-पौत्रम्-एनम्-	Thy grandson this
अनिरुद्धम्-अदृष्ट-पूर्वम्	Aniruddha not seen before
स्वप्ने-अनुभूय	in the dream meeting
भगवन्	O Lord!
विरह-आतुरा-अभूत्	separation pangs suffered
Bali's son Baana was a devotee of Shiva and had a thousand arms. His esteemed daughter Ushaa had not seen Thy grandson Aniruddha before. She met him in her dreams and suffered pangs of separation from him.
योगिन्यतीव कुशला खलु चित्रलेखा
तस्या: सखी विलिखती तरुणानशेषान् ।
तत्रानिरुद्धमुषया विदितं निशाया-
मानेष्ट योगबलतो भवतो निकेतात् ॥३॥
योगिनी-	a woman with yogic powers
अतीव कुशला	and very skilled
खलु चित्रलेखा	indeed Chitralekhaa
तस्या: सखि	her (Ushaa's) friend
विलिखती	draws (pictures)
तरुणान्-अशेषान्	of young men all
तत्र-अनिरुद्धम्-	from there, Aniruddha
उषया विदितं	by Ushaa was recognized
निशायाम्-आनेष्ट	during the night, brought (Chitralekhaa)
योग-बलत:	by yogic powers
भवत: निकेतात्	from Thy palace
Ushaa's friend Chitralekhaa had yogic powers and was very skilled in making drawings. She drew portraits of all the young men. Ushaa picked up Aniruddha's portrait whom she recognized. Chitralekhaa with her yogic powers then brought Aniruddha from Thy palace during the night.
कन्यापुरे दयितया सुखमारमन्तं
चैनं कथञ्चन बबन्धुषि शर्वबन्धौ ।
श्रीनारदोक्ततदुदन्तदुरन्तरोषै-
स्त्वं तस्य शोणितपुरं यदुभिर्न्यरुन्धा: ॥४॥
कन्या-पुरे	in the virgin's chambers
दयितया	with his beloved (Ushaa)
सुखम्-आरमन्तं	happily sporting
च-एनम् कथञ्चन	and him somehow
बबन्धुषि	tied up
शर्वबन्धौ	Shiva's devotee
श्री-नारद-उक्त-	by Shree Naarada told
तत्-उदन्त-	that news
दुरन्त:-रोषै:-त्वं	(in) unbounded anger Thou
तस्य शोणितपुरं	his (city) Shonitpura
यदुभि:-न्यरुन्धा:	with Yadus besieged
In the virgin's chamber, Aniruddha sported happily with his beloved Ushaa. Baana, Shivaa's devotee came to know this and tied him up. This news was given to Thee by Shree Naarad. In a fit of unbounded anger, Thou besieged Baana's city Shonitpura with the help of the Yaadavas.
पुरीपालश्शैलप्रियदुहितृनाथोऽस्य भगवान्
समं भूतव्रातैर्यदुबलमशङ्कं निरुरुधे ।
महाप्राणो बाणो झटिति युयुधानेनयुयुधे
गुह: प्रद्युम्नेन त्वमपि पुरहन्त्रा जघटिषे ॥५॥
पुरीपाल:-	the protector of the city
शैल-प्रिय-दुहितृ-नाथ:-अस्य	the mountain's dear daughter's consort, his
भगवान्	Lord Shiva
समं भूतव्रातै:-	with the Bhoota army
यदु-बलम्-अशङ्कं	the Yaadava army fearlessly
निरुरुधे	blocked
महाप्राण: बाण:	the mighty Baana
झटिति	quickly
युयुधानेन युयुधे	with Yuyudhaana fought
गुह: प्रद्युम्नेन	Guha with Pradyumna
त्वम्-अपि	Thou too
पुरहन्त्रा जघटिषे	(with) Tripura destroyer Shiva
The consort of the mountain's dear daughter, Shiva, being the protector of the city, with his army of the Bhootas blocked the army of the Yadavas, fearlessly. The mighty Baana quickly gave fight to Yuyudhaana, Guha to Pradyumna and Thou to Shiva, the destroyer of the Puras.
निरुद्धाशेषास्त्रे मुमुहुषि तवास्त्रेण गिरिशे
द्रुता भूता भीता: प्रमथकुलवीरा: प्रमथिता: ।
परास्कन्द्त् स्कन्द: कुसुमशरबाणैश्च सचिव:
स कुम्भाण्डो भाण्डं नवमिव बलेनाशु बिभिदे ॥६॥
निरुद्ध-अशेष-अस्त्रे	resisted were all the weapons
मुमुहुषि	became unconscious
तव-अस्त्रेण गिरिशे	by Thy weapon, Shiva
द्रुता:-भूता:-भीता:	fled the Bhootas in fear
प्रमथ-कुल-वीरा:	of the Pramatha dynasty, the leader
प्रमथिता:	were crushed
परास्कन्दत् स्कन्द:	was defeated Skanda (guha)
कुसुम-शर-बाणै:-च	by the flower bows's arrows of Pradyumna and
सचिव: स कुम्भाण्ड:	the minister of Baana, that Kumbhaanda
भाण्डं नवम्-इव	a pot new as though
बलेन-आशु बिभिदे	by Balaram was soon smashed
All Shiva's weapons were resisted and he was rendered unconscious by Thy weapon (Mohanaastra). All the army of the Bhootas fled in fear and the leaders of the Pramathas were crushed. Skanda was defeated, by the flower arrows of Pradyumna's bow. The minister of Baana, Kumbhaanda was soon smashed by Balaraam like a new pot.
चापानां पञ्चशत्या प्रसभमुपगते छिन्नचापेऽथ बाणे
व्यर्थे याते समेतो ज्वरपतिरशनैरज्वरि त्वज्ज्वरेण ।
ज्ञानी स्तुत्वाऽथ दत्वा तव चरितजुषां विज्वरं स ज्वरोऽगात्
प्रायोऽन्तर्ज्ञानवन्तोऽपि च बहुतमसा रौद्रचेष्टा हि रौद्रा: ॥७॥
चापानां पञ्चशत्या	by bows five hundred
प्रसभम्-उपगते	fiercely attacking
छिन्न-चापे-अथ बाणे	breaking of the bows then of Baana
व्यर्थे यात:	fruitlessly returning
समेत: ज्वरपति:-	came the head of all fevers the Shaiva fever
अशनै:-अज्वरि	immediately tormented
त्वत्-ज्वरेण	by Thy (the Vaishnava fever)
ज्ञानी स्तुत्वा-अथ	the enlightened (Shaiva fever) praising then
दत्वा तव चरितजुषां	giving to the (devotees) admirers of Thy excellences
विज्वरं स ज्वर:-अगात्	freedom, that (Shaiva) fever went away
प्राय:-अन्त:-ज्ञान्वन्त:-अपि	often inner knowledge having even
च बहु-तमसा	and by much of Tamas
रौद्र-चेष्टा हि रौद्रा:	ferociously act indeed the Rudras
Baana came attacking ferociously with 500 bows and arrows, but his weapons being severed he had to retreat. Thereupon, the head of all the obsession, the Shaiva obsession came to the forefront but was immediately put out by the Vaishnava obsession. The enlightened Shaivas gave freedom to all those that sung Thy excellences and went away praising Thee. Often the enlightened Rudras also act ferociously, being predominated by Tamas.
बाणं नानायुधोग्रं पुनरभिपतितं दर्पदोषाद्वितन्वन्
निर्लूनाशेषदोषं सपदि बुबुधुषा शङ्करेणोपगीत: ।
तद्वाचा शिष्टबाहुद्वितयमुभयतो निर्भयं तत्प्रियं तं
मुक्त्वा तद्दत्तमानो निजपुरमगम: सानिरुद्ध: सहोष: ॥८॥
बाणं नाना-आयुध-उग्रम्	Baana with various weapons more ferocious
पुन:-अभिपतितं	again having attacked
दर्प-दोषात्-वितन्वन्	due to the vice of arrogance, made him
निर्लून-अशेष-दोषं	by cutting off all his vices (arms)
सपदि बुबुधुषा	soon (a) realized (person)
शङ्करेण-उपगीत:	by Shankara and praised (Thee)
तत्-वाचा	by his request
शिष्ट-बाहु-द्वितयम्-उभयत:	left with arms two on both sides
निर्भयं तत्-प्रियं तं	unafraid his devotee him
मुक्त्वा	letting off
तत्-दत्त-मान:	by him giving honour
निज-पुरम्-अगम:	to Thy own city returned
सानिरुद्ध सहोष:	with Aniruddha (and) with Ushaa
Baana again attacked ferociously full of arrogance with his many various weapons. Thou made him devoid of all vice and his many arms by cutting them off. Shankara soon realised Thy greatness and praised Thee and on his request Thou let off Baana with his two arms on both sides. Baana who was then spared from the fear of death honoured Thee. Thou then returned to Thy city Dwaarikaa with Aniruddha and Ushaa.
मुहुस्तावच्छक्रं वरुणमजयो नन्दहरणे
यमं बालानीतौ दवदहनपानेऽनिलसखम् ।
विधिं वत्सस्तेये गिरिशमिह बाणस्य समरे
विभो विश्वोत्कर्षी तदयमवतारो जयति ते ॥९॥
मुहु:-तावत्-शक्रं	again and again then Indra
वरुणम्-अजय:	Varuna defeated
नन्द-हरणे	when he had kidnapped Nanda Gopa
यमं बाल-आनीतौ	Yama when he had taken away the (Guru's) children
दव-दहन-पाने-	the forest fire by drinking
अनिल-सखम्	wind's friend Agni
विधिं वत्स-स्तेये	Brahmaa when the calves were stolen
गिरिशम्-इह्	Shiva here
बाणस्य समरे	in Baana's battle
विभो	O Lord!
विश्व-उत्कर्षी	all excelling
तत्-अयम्-अवतार:	therefore this incarnation (of Thee) (as Krishna)
जयति ते	excels Thine
Thou indeed defeated Indra again and again, Varuna was defeated when he kidnapped Nandagopa and Yama was defeated by Thee when he took away the children of Thy Guru. Agni, Vayu's friend was overcome when Thou drank it during the forest fire and Brahmaa was defeated when he stole away the calves. Shiva was defeated here in Baana's battle. Therefore, O Lord! this incarnation of Thee excels and wins over all other of Thy incarnations.
द्विजरुषा कृकलासवपुर्धरं नृगनृपं त्रिदिवालयमापयन् ।
निजजने द्विजभक्तिमनुत्तमामुपदिशन् पवनेश्वर् पाहि माम् ॥१०॥
द्विज-रुषा	by a holy Braahmin's anger
कृकलास:-वपु:-धरं	in a chameleon's body form
नृग-नृपं	Nriga king
त्रिदिव-आलयम्-	to the god's abode (heaven)
आपयन्	sending
निज-जने	in Thy people (devotees)
द्विज-भक्तिम्-अनुत्तमाम्-	for Braahminas respect supreme
उपदिशन्	instructing
पवनेश्वर पाहि माम्	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
King Nriga who was reduced to the body of a chameleon by a holy Braahmin's curse, was purified and sent to heaven by Thee. By this Thou instructed Thy devotees to have supreme respect for holy Braahmins. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Save me.